>>WILLIAM HENRY:
What if you possessed
a stone that could instantly
manifest all your wishes?
>>CLARE HENRY: Today on Arcanum,
the Philosopher's Stone.
>>WILLIAM: Arcanum, the
great secret or mystery.
>>CLARE: The
dictionary says arcanum
is the incredible
secret of nature,
that the alchemist
sought to discover
the Philosopher's Stone.
It's a most sacred
and powerful remedy.
>>WILLIAM: The great arcanum
was the most prized secrets
of the Atlantean priestcraft.
When the land of Atlas sank,
hierophants of the fire mystery
brought the formula to Egypt
where it remained for centuries
in the possession of the
sages and philosophers.
It gradually moved into Europe
where its secrets are still
preserved intact.
>>CLARE: History's greatest
heroes and villains
have sought the stone.
>>WILLIAM: Napoleon,
Constantine, Hitler, Saddam
Hussein, Mahmoud Ahmadinejad.
>>CLARE: For millennia,
the power elite villains
and insiders of the world have
coveted, obsessed, stolen,
spilled blood, and fought
over certain works of art
and the secret facts
and esoteric knowledge
that they conceal.
>>WILLIAM: That's why the
secrets of these works
have been for their eyes only
and lost to the rest of us,
often hidden in secretive
locations or x places.
Talk of the secrets has been a
dangerous proposition for some.
>>CLARE: Why?
A conspiracy?
Well, yes.
>>WILLIAM: To them this
information is theirs
and it's none of your business.
And for good reason.
The art is arcanum.
>>CLARE: It contains or conceals
sensational ancient esoteric
knowledge, deep dark secrets
about the light and mystical
knowledge that brings immense
power and finally peace
to those who can decode it.
We're talking about the
real treasure of treasures.
>>WILLIAM: Whether
the subject is
the ark of the covenant,
ancient Sumerian artifacts,
the holy grail, alchemy,
miracles, ancient portals,
or advanced ancient
technologies,
angels, apparitions,
many great artists
have investigated these subjects
and discovered their secrets,
usually on behalf of the most
powerful people in the world.
>>CLARE: Often the art treasure
portrays miraculous events,
such as the resurrection
of Jesus or beams
of light coming from the sky.
Other times, it shows
portals to other realms.
>>WILLIAM: Is it
possible the ancients
knew about portals or gateways
to the stars, immortality oils
and other knowledge we're only
just beginning to apprehend?
>>CLARE: Let's find out.
William's feature
investigation will take us
into the mysteries of
the rod and the stone.
>>WILLIAM: My
feature investigation
is the rod and the stone.
The elusive
Philosopher's Stone has
been the holy
grail of alchemists
ever since ancient times
when the craft was first
devised in ancient India and
Egypt and China and elsewhere.
Transmutation is the basis of
this art, which is the ability
to change one element
into a more valuable one.
It has obsessed men of learning
and power for millennia.
The alchemical process
in its most basic sense
is considered to be the
process of transmuting lower
forms into a higher or
perhaps a more pure form.
The emerald tablet
is thought to contain
the secret of the
Philosopher's Stone.
It promises to link
one's consciousness
with universal mind.
It's attributed to
Hermes Trismegistus, who
is a Greek figure who's a
combination of the Greek god
Hermes and also the Egyptian god
Thoth, the god of divine magic
and alchemy.
It's very interesting that
biblical scholars believe
that Thoth is actually
the biblical figure Enoch,
one of the most learned
men of the ancient world.
Here we see Hermes with
his primary symbol,
the caduceus wand, the
staff of the alchemist,
the staff of arcanum.
And what we see here is
Hermes with his wand and also
his winged sandals.
Hermes, like Thoth,
is considered
to be the inventor of writing.
He's the god of
letters and esoteric
and especially
alchemical knowledge.
As such, he was called
the mysterious one
or the unknown one.
Because of his
magical powers, he
was looked upon as a
physician of the soul
and also the
messenger of the gods.
With his magic staff,
he had the ability
to conduct souls
between dimensions,
between the life on
earth and the afterlife.
So here in the
detail we see Hermes
with his magnificent wand.
This is the rod or
staff of the gods
that all humans ultimately
want to get their hands on.
And in this illustration here,
we see Hermes with the rod
or wand conducting the soul,
here symbolized by a bird.
And also assisting this
other soul in its journey
into the afterlife.
His symbol is the
caduceus wand as well,
which is almost always shown
with entwined serpents.
Many will be familiar with this
symbol as that of the American
as well as the British
Medical Association.
Essentially the
entwined serpents
wind their way up a rod
that is topped by wings
and is often illuminated.
When we look into
ancient art, we
will see Hermes with
his winged sandals
and his cap of
invisibility-- let's not
forget that-- and
his other symbols.
And whether it's
in ancient Greece
or in Rome, where Hermes
is known as Mercury,
he always has the same symbols.
The familiar caduceus here,
cradling it in his arms.
Always with this cap
of invisibility as well
and his winged sandals that
take him into other dimensions.
He may have acquired
the caduceus
from the goddess Iris, the
goddess of the rainbow who
is the feminine messenger of the
gods, who actually also nursed
the baby Hermes.
So there is a feminine
component to this as well.
It's not just the male
gods that had this symbol
or utilized this tool.
It's also the divine
feminine as well.
Iris, the goddess
of the rainbow.
A very key attribute that we'll
discuss again momentarily.
In Rome, Iris was
called Juno, and she's
known as the goddess
of the rainbow.
And she was also, of course,
known as the feminine Hermes.
With her rod or wand
she conducted souls
to the afterlife.
The key piece of the
lore about Hermes,
though, is that he was known
as Thoth in ancient Egypt.
Thoth or Tahuti, as he's
technically referred to,
was the great initiator.
And in the temple walls
of Egypt you will often
see Thoth with his hand above
an individual, a pharaoh
typically, and he appears
to be beaming energy to him.
That's exactly what he's doing.
He's actually
attuning the pharaoh.
Thoth played a key role
in the afterlife ceremony
known as the weighing
of the heart.
What the ancient Egyptian
gods wanted to know
was-- what they most
wanted to know about humans
was how light hearted
of a being were we.
And so they had in
the afterlife what
was called the weighing
of the heart ceremony,
where the heart of the
initiate was weighed
against a feather of
Maat, the symbol of divine
or cosmic truth.
And so here we see the heart
of the initiative being
weighed against that feather.
And the idea was is that
if the heart weighed
less than the
feather, then the soul
was allowed to continue on
its spiral of evolution.
If it weighed more
than the feather, then
there was a recycling program,
this multi-faceted beast here.
Whatever the outcome,
it was the great Thoth
who recorded that result.
Here we are in the
Metropolitan Museum of Art
in New York City where Thoth is
attuning the pharaoh by bathing
him in a spray of
the symbol called
the ankh or the key of life.
We see the same thing
here from a temple wall
at Karnak in Egypt where
Thoth is joined by Ra
and they're shown
basking Hatshepsut
in a multi-colored ray of
ankhs, or a keys of life.
They are clearly
attuning this goddess.
They are raising her vibration
with the symbol of the ankh
or the key of life.
This is very
important because it
begins to link the idea of sound
or vibration, a key to Thoth.
Thoth's other primary
symbol is the baboon,
the creature that
greets the dawn.
And here we see
the baboon holding
what's called the udjat
eye, the eye of perfection,
which is a very important symbol
in ancient Egyptian arcanum.
Here's Thoth with
another god, Ptah,
who is also known as a god
of smithcraft or alchemy.
And what we note
here is that both
of the gods in this temple,
seen here from Abydos,
hold rods in their hands.
This is our staff of arcanum.
This is the object of
the alchemical quest
to get our hands on
this all powerful staff
of transmutation.
Featured here is Thoth with
his caduceus rod or wand
and also with the key of life.
And what he's doing
here is actually
resurrecting the King Seti who
is portrayed here as Osiris.
Thoth is resurrecting him with
his caduceus rods and the key
of life, once again uniting
the concept of the rod
or wand with the key
or tone or vibration.
What we notice in
the detail here
is that the key is
being offered by Thoth
and Seti is inhaling
the key, indicating
that he is consuming
the key, he is actually
becoming this higher vibration
and it is transforming him
preparatory to his journey
into the afterlife.
Beautiful, beautiful
detail here.
And you can almost
inhale that key
of life yourself just looking
at this extraordinary temple
image.
Something most people don't know
is that in early Christian art,
Jesus was portrayed similarly
to Thoth with his rod
or wand in hand.
In fact, in early
Christian art, up
until about the fourth
century, whenever
Jesus was portrayed performing
the miracles, whether turning
water into wine,
loaves into fishes,
or raising Lazarus from the
dead, he did so with a rod
or wand in his hand.
I had an opportunity to
go to Rome to the museums
at the National Museum in
Rome as well as the Vatican
to study the early Christian
sarcophagi that document Jesus'
use of a rod or a wand
just like that used
by Thoth in ancient Egypt
and Hermes in Greece.
So here is Jesus,
several examples
from sarcophagi, of
Jesus using the rod
or wand to raise
Lazarus from the dead.
There's something
very interesting.
And that is that when you add
the first letter L to the name
Osiris, you get the name,
phonetically, the name Lazarus.
So here seems to be a
code or a key telling us
that perhaps, indeed,
Jesus did acquire the rod
or wand of Hermes or Thoth.
And in these scenes
here, we notice
something very important.
And that is Jesus is
striking Lazarus right
on the top of his crown chakra.
He is awakening his
higher consciousness.
This is because
technically speaking,
Lazarus wasn't dead in
that he was deceased.
Lazarus was not awakened
in his consciousness.
And after Jesus taps
him on the crown chakra,
then Lazarus is now a
fully awakened being.
And according to
the Bible, is then
able to perceive the glory of
God, the light or vibration
of God.
So these are extraordinary
historical examples
of a continuous transmission of
arcanum, beginning with Thoth,
coming into ancient Greece, and
now into early Christian times.
This is an extraordinary
gold plate,
a photo of a gold plate, a
photo that I took in the Vatican
Museum in Vatican City,
showing Jesus raising Lazarus.
Here again raising Lazarus.
And on the bottom,
he's turning water
into wine with his rod
or wand of arcanum.
Was Jesus in fact
a divine alchemist?
These images make a case
that that is in fact so.
In this instance here, he's
turning water into wine
as other disciples look on.
And he has his hand
on another figure
here, attuning or
initiating him.
Again, the rod is being used
to turn water into wine.
Again, water into wine and
raising Lazarus from the dead.
In one of the earliest examples,
we turn to Santa Sabina in Rome
where we see these
magnificent cypress doors
where we see three examples
of Jesus using this rod
or wand of arcanum
to awaken a figure.
The Church of Santa Sabina
on the Aventine Hill in Rome
is famous for the
cypress door which
may date to the
early fifth century
when the church was built.
And one panel actually
contains a scene
that is generally regarded
as the first depiction
of the crucifixion of Jesus.
Look at this here.
I mean, it's extraordinary.
There's no cross.
It's just simply Jesus awakening
and in a special prayer pose.
Very interesting.
And back to using the wand or
rod to turn water into wine.
The loaves turned into
fishes in this example
here from Santa Sabina.
So what we've done here is
made a direct connection
between Jesus and Thoth.
This is the arcanum
we're talking about here.
This is the most highly
sought after secret
in all the ancient world.
How can we awaken
our consciousness
and connect ourselves with
universal consciousness?
How can we raise ourselves
metaphorically from the dead
and, speaking literally, how
can we attain immortality?
That's the promise
of this rod or wand.
In Jewish legend,
Jacob inherited a rod
or a staff that once belonged to
Adam in lore who brought it out
of the Garden of
Eden with him, which
means it has this ancient,
ancient pre-history.
It once belonged to Enoch
as well as to Moses.
And in this painting
by William Blake,
we see Moses with
that rod or wand.
If you know your
Bible story, you
know that Moses used this rod
or wand to part the Red Sea.
He also struck a
rock with this wand
and caused water
to emerge from it.
Jacob, when he used
this staff, had
an extraordinary experience.
It was Jacob, of
course, who famously
laid his head on a stone,
which must be the Philosopher's
Stone, and saw heaven open.
The book of Genesis
tells us the Jacob
lays his head on this
stone, falls into a dream,
and sees a ladder
or stairway reaching
into the heavens with angels
ascending and descending
on either side.
This is one of the
earliest examples
of the opening of a portal
in biblical literature.
And you have to ask, what
was the role of the stone
and what was the role
of the rod that Jacob
is said to have possessed?
Did he put these
two pieces together
and open a portal
or gateway leading
into the heavenly realms?
William Blake does something
very, very interesting
here when he shows the angels
ascending and descending
on this spiral stairway that
leads right through the sun.
What Blake is doing is riffing
on ancient Egyptian stargate
metaphysics, as I term it.
Because the ancient Egyptians
believed that our sun was,
in fact, a sun tunnel, a star
tunnel, or to use a modern day
term, a star gate.
So here we are uniting
the stone and the rod
and opening a portal or gateway
that leads into the heavens.
In angelic symbolism, the
trump represents the instrument
that joins heaven and earth.
And in this alchemical
illustration,
we see the ladder, now, with the
angels ascending and descending
with a trumpet.
They're actually
blowing a key or a tone
into Jacob's consciousness.
Here's the idea of the key,
tone, or vibration emerging
once again that awakens
our consciousness
and enables us to perceive
the ladder, stairway,
or stargate to heaven.
Today the instrument that
joins heaven and earth
is called a wormhole.
And look at this.
Look at the shape of the
mouth of the wormhole.
It looks like a trumpet.
Then we go through the
throat of the wormhole
and emerge through another
bell or trumpet shaped opening.
Could it be that
the ancient stargate
was in fact a wormhole?
Is that what these ladder or
stairway to heaven stories
are actually about?
I think so.
The hermetic text acquired
their present form
in the first centuries
of our era in Alexandria.
This is when there was a
great confluence of knowledge
about transforming or
perfecting the human body
preparatory to this journey
upon the stairway to heaven.
These texts drew from all
the other books and texts
that were stored at the
famed Library of Alexandria.
The Royal Library of Alexandria
or the Ancient Library
of Alexandria, as
it was also called,
was described by many
as the largest and most
significant great library
of the ancient world.
Built by the
Ptolemies, it's thought
to have stored between
200,000 and 400,000 texts
from the ancient world.
It was situated in Alexandria,
which of course was named
after the founder, Alexander
the Great in Egypt.
Plutarch wrote that during his
visit to Alexandria in 48 BC,
Julius Caesar accidentally
burned the library down
when he set fire
to his own ships
to frustrate Achilles's is
attempt to limit his ability
to communicate by sea.
After its destruction, scholars
used a daughter library
in the temple known
as the Sarapion, which
was located in another
part of Alexandria.
The Sarapion is named
after the god Serapis, who
was a later version
of the Egyptian god
Osiris, the god of resurrection.
Serapis is often
portrayed as a bearded man
with the body of a serpent,
as he's shown here with Isis.
This is a drawing
that was actually
done by one of
Napoleon's artists
when they invaded Egypt in 1798.
It gives us a sense
of what it must've
been like to worship Serapis
in the ancient world.
Theodosius was a
zealous Christian,
and when he ordered the
image of Serapis or Serapis
in Alexandria be destroyed,
the Christians there burnt
the valuable library that
was housed in the Sarapion
and ultimately those
texts were lost.
But actually they
were disseminated
throughout Byzantium and
ultimately made their way
into Europe.
At the temple of Isis
and Herculaneum in Italy,
we find two mural frescoes
that we're dating from 100 BC
to about 62 AD that portray
scenes in the worship of Isis
by Alexandrian goddesses.
This scene is called "The
Adoration of the Sacred Water"
or the water of the Nile,
which was considered
to be an emblem of
Osiris or Serapis.
What we see here in the
foreground are three alters.
The middle one with
the fire burning on it,
which an attendant is
fanning, while on the right
there's a flute player
seated on the ground
having in front of him a priest
with a wand in either hand,
and on the left a man
and a woman shaking
sistra, an ancient
Egyptian instrument.
So here again we're linking the
idea of the wand with music.
And what we're going
to see once again
is the opening of a
portal or a gateway.
So here we see in the detail
the flute player on the right
and the priest with
the wands beside him.
The music, it
seems to be opening
the portal or the
gateway and perhaps
even activating the wand.
Now that's an interesting idea.
So next we see a
staircase that's
guarded by the two sphinx here.
Before the door at
the head of the stairs
stands a priest with a shaven
crown of the Alexandrian
priesthood holding with both
hands an urn breast high.
While behind him are two others
one of whom, probably a woman,
is completely clothed and wears
long hair and shakes a sistrum,
that ancient
Egyptian instrument,
while the other is naked to
the waist and has his head
shaved just like
the central figure.
The central figure is Serapis.
And he's clearly
portrayed standing
in a gateway or a doorway.
And we have to ask the
question, is it possible
that the flute player and
the wand bearer in fact
opened the door for
Serapis to emerge?
Beautiful, beautiful
illustration.
And here's the figure holding
a rod or wand or a sword,
rather, standing
before the stairway,
indicating that Serapis is at
a higher level or perhaps even
an ascended level.
On either side we see
a choir once again
with initiates
singing antofitally,
or in two choirs, the hymn of
Serapis indicating that we're
once again opening the
portal or the gateway
through sound or
vibration, music.
The treatises that we now call
the corpus hermeticum, which
were derived from the
Alexandrian Library, which
is perhaps the best
known hermetic work
were compiled
mainly in the second
to third centuries
of the current era
and have been preserved
in Greek caduceus.
Although Coptic or Egyptian
Christian fragments
have also been recovered in
Nag Hammadi in Egypt in 1945.
They were lost
originally until 1463
when Cosimo de Medici financed
the search for arcanum.
In 1459, Cosimo founded
a new platonic Academy
in Florence, Italy to revive
the Gnostic teachings of Plato.
The Corpus Hermeticum was
brought to Florence in 1460
from Turkey or Byzantium.
It was translated by
Marsilio Ficino, who
was pulled from the project of
translating the works of Plato
to work on the all
important Corpus Hermeticum
And here are some examples of
first editions of the Corpus
Hermeticum as translated
by Marsilio Ficino.
Ficino realized that
Christianity was actually
a variation or an interpretation
of a group of followers
of the Corpus
Heremeticum, specifically
the cult of Serapis.
Now this is very powerful
information concerning
the Roman Catholic
Church was just
then beginning to take power.
High priest physician,
musician, astrologer, Christian.
Marsilio Ficino was the
original renaissance man.
And in this floor mosaic, we
see Ficino in the left corner
with Plato standing
before Moses.
There's a very good
reason for this
and this is because
Ficino and his successors
regarded Hermes Trismegistus
as a contemporary of Moses.
And his teachings were seen
as a philosophy of Perennis,
or a perennial philosophy
predicating yet
anticipating
Christianity by centuries
with its roots in
pharaonic Egypt,
taking us all the
way back to Thoth.
And for Ficino, Jesus
was the exemplar
of the ultimate human
potential, our ability
to attain resurrection
or what we now
refer to as the glory
body, or indeed,
the rainbow body of light.
Ficino sought to fuse
Christianity with its roots
in Egypt by linking Jesus
with Thoth and also Hermes.
Ficino wrote extensively
about techniques
whereby planetary powers
were to be invoked
by the principles
of hermetic analogy.
This is one of the key
statements from the Corpus
Heremticum which is, "As
above, so below, as within, so
without."
And we might add, "as
then, as now," indicating
that all essentially is one and
is happening at the same time.
Ficino believed that the human
soul originated in the higher
world but is trapped in the body
in the lower world on earth.
And Plato's writings describe
the return or ascent,
the ascension of the soul
to its true perfect home,
the unity of the one God.
Ficino wrote and performed
music, not surprisingly,
that drew down or attracted
stellar influences, which
was referred to as the
music of the spheres.
This was possible
because the human soul
is made of star
stuff, Ficino taught.
Ficino had previously translated
the neoplatonist Iamblichus,
who spoke about magical
practice of divine work,
or theurgy, of purifying
the subtle or astral body
through ritual
techniques to the extent
that it became divinized.
Whilst the theurgist was still
alive and thus constituted
a vehicle for his
return to the gods.
What we're talking about
here is divine work
that enables us to
manifest the rainbow
body or the resurrection body of
Christ while we're still alive.
Now, this is controversial
because Christianity teaches
that we will only be
able to accomplish
this in the afterlife.
But Ficino and the
neoplatonists believed
that we could even do
it while still alive.
And we notice Jesus here in his
resurrection or rainbow body,
he holds the staff of
arcanum in his hand, which
is featured in this
example as a cross.
The rainbow body is
a Tibetan concept.
The Tibetans believed
that the human body
was designed to be spun
into a vortex of energy that
ultimately manifests as
five colored rainbow light.
And once we attain this
resurrection or rainbow body,
then we can travel the
cosmos as light beings.
What we notice in this image
here of this Tibetan tonka
is that the llama actually
also holds a staff.
So we know we're talking about
the staff or rod of arcanum
here, which its ultimate
manifestation is
that of the rainbow body of
light or the resurrection body.
Now Ficino believed
that he could draw down
the power of the
stars and planets
to aid in his
spiritual evolution
or attainment of the
rainbow body of light.
We are trapped on
Earth, he believed,
as I said a moment ago,
and the only way out
was to refine the soul and
ascend to the heavenly realms.
The Tibetans teach
the same thing,
that the only way we ultimately
will be able to leave earth
is by obtaining
the rainbow body.
But Ficino was willing to
go down the Christian path
and say that Jesus
is the exemplar
of the ultimate attainment
of human potential,
our manifestation or morphing
into the rainbow body of light,
which enables our ascension.
Furthermore, this
process takes place,
Iamblichus taught
and Ficino affirmed,
through the imaginative
power of the theurgist.
Now this is a very important
point because it tells us
that Ficino and the
others that he influenced
were activating the power
of their imagination.
And that was one of the
key tools or instruments
that they could use in
their ascension process.
One way to tap the
power of the imagination
and open the door
of ascension was
through music, sound, vibration.
The other was through
the power of symbols.
The soul's language,
Ficino taught, is symbols.
Ficino taught that images
that point us to the source
could be created to
empower the imagination
and thereby empower the
soul in its ascension.
Through engaging
with the images,
we actually can become
them, was Ficino's premise.
Chiefly cited as being his
follower and the man who
incorporated this magical
knowledge or astro
magic in his paintings
was Sandro Botticelli,
one of the greatest
masters of the Renaissance.
His application of this
methodology via paintings
and the Minerva and
the Centaur, the Birth
of Venus and the
Primavera, were all
commissioned by Lorenzo de
Medici, Cosimo de Medici's son.
All three paintings
deal with occult themes
and represent the magical
practice of drawing down
planetary influences
into images or paintings,
as outlined by Ficino.
It is known that for the
Primavera in particular,
Botticelli directly consulted
Ficino and all three
of these paintings
will be examined
in detail in a separate episode.
And it's no wonder that
they are considered
to be some of the
greatest master works
or most iconic paintings
in all human history.
It's because they were
designed or created
with the intention of
empowering the soul's ascension.
Switching gears in our
continuing discussion
of the stone here, in
Hinduism and Buddhism
we learn that the Philosopher's
Stone is called the Chintamani
Stone, or the wish
fulfilling jewel.
It's called this because it
manifests whatever one wishes.
The Chintamani Stone is
one of four relics that
came to earth in a
chest from heaven
and is held by Bodhisattvas
or enlightened beings.
So here we see a
Bodhisattva with,
no surprise, a
staff in his hand,
holding the Chintamani Stone,
the wish fulfilling jewel,
once again uniting
the rod and the stone,
but now in the Buddhist context.
The idea here is that these
Bodhisattvas have the ability
to access the deepest powers
of the imagination, the deepest
powers of the soul.
And this power is symbolized
by the acquisition
of this stone, the
Chintamani Stone.
Shown here is Ksitigarbha,
the earth store Bodhisattva.
With his staff he uses to
pound open the gates to hell.
So here we are again talking
about the rod or staff
as a tool or instrument that
opens a portal or gateway
to another realm,
especially the afterlife.
He also holds in his hand
his Chintamani stone,
which is also referred to as
the pearl for illuminating
all the various realms
of hell to benefit
sentient beings trapped there.
So that's the role of
this enlightened being
is to use the staff and the
stone, the rod and the stone,
to open a portal or gateway
for the sentient beings
in this afterlife realm, and
in a sense, to free them.
Jesus is also shown
with a staff, the cross,
when he descended into
hell in those three
days between crucifixion
and resurrection
so that he could free
the righteous souls
from Old Testament
times, including
Adam and Abraham
and other figures.
Eve as well.
Did Jesus also
possess the stone?
What exactly was that
stone that was rolled away
from the tomb on Easter morning?
Could it in fact
have been a symbol
of the Philosopher's Stone
or the Chintamani Stone?
In example after
example in Christian art
we see Jesus with
his illuminated halo
or nimbus opening the
portal or gateway to hell
with his staff in hand.
And we have to imagine that
somewhere the stone is also
present.
This is Fra Angelico's version
of the story with Jesus holding
the rod or staff in
hand greeting Abraham
and other figures of
the Old Testament times
as he frees them from
their bondage in hell.
Coming back to Buddhism, we see
the Ksitigarbha, supreme lord
of the underworld, once again,
who is in a way an equivalent
to Jesus in his role of
using the staff and the stone
to free souls, especially
righteous souls,
from otherworldly
realms or limbo,
enabling them to
complete their ascension
and return to the source realm.
So what we have
to ask is that are
we talking about
here the opening once
again of a portal or a stargate.
Is the staff or rod in the
stone tools or implements
that actually open
stargates into other realms?
What about the idea
of sound or vibration
again in opening this
portal or gateway?
Well, this is the answered by
the Buddhists who teach that,
to achieve illumination or
experience Buddha nature,
we must meditate on
the jewel and the heart
of the golden lotus, which
is the Chintamani Stone,
and chant om mani padme hum.
Om mani padme hum.
So here we are
once again linking
the idea of sound or
vibration with the stone.
The jewel or stone
which is the Chintamani
is also called the blue pearl,
as I noted a moment ago.
So in Buddhist art we will
see the awakened ones,
the Bodhisattvas, in this
radiant portal or gateway
holding the blue pearl
or the Chintamani Stone.
The goal of meditation
in the Siddha practice
is to see this blue
pearl or this blue stone
and ultimately to go inside
it and to merge with it.
Within the blue
pearl or stone you
will see the deity you
have personal devotion
to, be it Ptah, Jesus, Buddha,
Sai Baba, Krishna, or Rama.
So here we are once
again holding the stone
with the open portal
or gateway behind us.
And this is, again, what we
see in Christian ascension art.
Jesus is ascending through
the blue portal or gateway,
indicating that he's traveling
into the divine realms.
And it could well be that
this blue orb he's riding on
is a Christian symbol
for the Chintamani Stone.
It's very interesting
to me that Jesus
holds the ring of
sovereignty in his hand
as well as a rolled up scroll.
So the ring unites us once again
with the stone and the scroll
in a way could be
thought of actually
as the rod or the wand.
In this beautiful
alchemical depiction
from the Divine Comedy
by Giovanni de Paolo
we see Jesus in the
blue orb surrounded
by the ouroboros, the symbol
of the alchemical craft.
So we know that what
we're talking about here
is that divine magic or
theurgy that Marsilio Ficino
spoke of and wrote so
passionately about.
And view Jesus, once
again, as the exemplar
of the ultimate human potential
to transform ourselves
into rainbow body light beings
and ascend into the heavenly
realms.
So a few more
examples here of Jesus
ascending or transforming
with the open blue portal
or gateway behind him.
This one here from Egypt
in the 10th century where
we see Jesus on the throne
with the blue rings behind him.
And when we see concentric
rings in a painting,
we have to remember
it almost always can
indicate sound or vibration as
well as a portal or a gateway,
a vortex.
So once again, we're uniting the
idea of ascension with a portal
and also with sound.
From the Hagio
Sofia we see Jesus
in the blue orb of concentric
rings filled with manna or star
stuff descending
into the heavens.
Jerusalem's Dome of
the Rock is described
as an x place or a portal
or a stargate where
the heavenly fire
meets the earth.
And I thought it
would be valuable
for us to take a moment
to go inside this most
sacred dot of real
estate on earth
and appreciate its
portal symbolism.
There's another reason we want
to look into this sacred place.
And that is because
this location
is marked by one of the most
profound locations on earth.
The Dome of the
Rock conceals what
is considered to be the
most sacred stone or rock
and dot of real estate on earth.
It is called the
Foundation Stone
and is said to have
been planted here
at the beginning of
creation and taken
by God from his throne of glory.
Jews see it as the
center of the Earth,
the axis of the universe, the
ladder or stairway to heaven,
the connecting link that
joins heaven and earth,
or the pivot that
joins heaven and earth.
And here is a beautiful painting
showing that Foundation Stone,
the most sacred dot of
real estate on earth,
according to the Judeo
Christian tradition.
And here is a modern day
photograph showing the stone
with the portal imagery
above it on the interior
of the Dome of the Rock.
This of course is
the location where
the Jews had taken the
Ark of the Covenant.
And it was also the location
of Solomon's temple,
the permanent home
for the Ark, which
was housed in the holy of
holies of Solomon's temple.
And inside the holy of holies
was the most holy place,
this golden cube shaped room
where the Ark of the Covenant
was located.
And here we see the
Israelite priests
carrying the Ark of the
Covenant in the wilderness,
ultimately taking it to its
destination in Jerusalem.
And we see the divine
pillar emanating
from the Ark of the Covenant,
indicating its purpose, which
is to link heaven and earth.
What most don't realize is
that the Ark of the Covenant
was considered to be the throne
of the Israelite God Yahweh.
And in the Bible,
Yahweh is described
as a luminous humanoid figure
with a rainbow-like energy
around him.
He's luminous, humanoid, and
surrounded in rainbow light.
And that's powerful because
it raises the question
or possibility that in fact
Yahweh was a rainbow body
being, which is very, very
strong statement to make,
but also tremendously
controversial
because most don't think
of the Old Testament God
as being a humanoid figure.
And what we notice
in this painting
by Carl Gutherz in the Library
of Congress reading room
is that Yahweh on his throne
holds a stone in his hand.
And this stone is remarkably
similar in its symbolism
and appearance and also
perhaps its purpose
to the Chintamani Stone.
Is it possible that we are
seeing yet another connection
between the Buddhist
Bodhisattvas and the Old
Testament God Yahweh?
We know that the
Ark of the Covenant
is the device upon which he sits
and it held several other tools
or instruments, including
the rod of Aaron,
the rod of enlightenment,
the tablet or stones
that had the Ten
Commandments written on them,
a flask of manna as well
as a cruc of sacred oil.
So once again,
it's very possible
that the stone in Yahweh's
hand and the stone
in the Bodhisattva's hand are
the same thing, the Chintamani
stone, the wish
fulfilling jewel.
But we're going to take
this one layer deeper.
Because we know from Buddhist
teachings as well as Christian
teachings that all
of this actually
happens inside our bodies.
And whether it's Jesus holding
the stone in his hand here as
he's doing in this
painting by Fra Angelico,
or it's Jesus in
this example here
on his heavenly throne where
he's holding the stone,
or in this example
here as a child where
he's holding the
stone, which symbolizes
universal power,
that all of these
represent something that
happens inside of us.
In "Foundation Stone and
Jerusalem of the Mind,"
author JD Bakst notes
that one of the names
of the pineal gland in the
center of the brain which
is under our dome in the
center of our dome, in fact,
is the foundation stone.
This gland has long
been considered
the gate through which the
soul enters and exits the body.
Now in 2006, scientists reported
that at close magnification,
calcite microcrystals were
visible on the pineal gland.
What this means is that the
stone in the center of our head
is literally a stone.
It is a crystal.
And what these scientists
have discovered
is that these crystals have
a piezoelectric properties
with excitability
in the frequency
range of mobile
telecommunications.
They theorize that
the interactions
of these crystals
with global system
for mobile
telecommunication waves
could constitute a new
mechanism of transduction
of the perennial membrane.
What this means
in layman's terms
is that our pineal
gland is a cell phone.
The wireless transmitter
that we're all
looking for that links us with
the universal consciousness
is our pineal gland.
That's the stone within us.
And where does that stone sit?
Right at the top of the
rod, our spinal cord system.
How's that for linking these
extraordinary concepts that
are out here in these
paintings with what
goes on inside each of us?
And we're all learning to
climb this ladder or stairway
to heaven and activate
or get the stone.
Bakst sheds immense light on the
relationship between the pineal
and the unusual river of life
giving fluid Ezekiel describes
appearing in the inner
sanctum, the holy of holies,
of the temple.
It causes the stone to begin
releasing microscopic spirit
molecules of living liquid
that Bakst proposes is actually
dimethyltryptamine, or DMT, a
natural but enigmatic substance
generated by the pineal
gland that facilitates
inner dimensional experiences.
Is it possible that Marsilio
Ficino and Sandro Bottichelli
and Plato actually knew
that our pineal gland was
capable of being
activated by images
as well as sound to open portals
or gateways into other realms?
We now know that by consciously
stimulating and activating
the pineal gland, the
hidden and therefore
black stone residing
within each one of us,
we cause the oil of heaven
to flow through our body
and into our world.
And it is that oil
that ultimately
transmutes our body into light.
In this amazing painting by
William West, he shows a head.
We see the nose
and we see the chin
with the Ark of the
Covenant located exactly
in the location of
the pineal gland,
suggesting to me that
William West knew
that the Ark of the
Covenant isn't out here.
It's not in Ethiopia.
It's not in the US Capitol in
Washington DC as some propose.
It's right here within us.
And the stone, the rod, the
oil is also within us as well.
And by meditating
on, contemplating,
and focusing on these
images, according to Ficino,
we activate this latent
capability within us.
And now in this segment
of Beyond The Veil,
Clare is going to take is
deeper into the symbolism
of the rod and the stone.
>>CLARE: As we have
seen, the arcanum
is symbolized by
a rod and a stone.
The rod is called the caduceus.
It is often shown topped by
a bird, thought to be a dove.
Few symbols have a tradition as
long and as rich as the dove.
It is the subject of this
edition of Beyond The Veil.
The dove often represents
the divine and its use
has been shared, adapted,
and reinterpreted
across goddess
cultures and millennia,
to suit changing belief systems.
In addition to its symbolism
for the Holy Spirit,
the dove was a popular
Christian symbol
before the cross
rose to prominence
in the fourth century.
In holy grail lore,
the white dove
is the bringer of
the holy stone, which
is referred to in the Book of
Revelation as the white stone,
meaning pure stone.
The stone is the
Philosopher's Stone.
It will enable the initiate
to transmute their body
into light to join
the other superhuman
light beings in the land of
the living or the light land.
The dove is the symbol
for the arcanum.
In mythology, the caduceus
wand is the alchemical talisman
or device that enables messenger
beings to travel back and forth
from the realm of the gods.
It is the symbol of the
transformation or perfection
of these star walkers
into pure beings of light.
The dove is considered
to be a symbol
for a cosmic vibration,
a holy essence.
In the beginning, says
Genesis 1, verses 1 and 2,
God created the
heavens and the earth.
The Earth was without
form, and void and darkness
was on the face of the deep.
And the spirit of
God was hovering
over the face of the
waters like a dove,
according to the
Babylonian Talmud.
Juan de Flandes shows
archangel Gabriel
conducting the cosmic
essence of the Milky Way
into the crown chakra
with the arcanum staff.
In this extraordinary
painting by Carlo Crivelli,
we see a beam of light
bolting out of a cloud.
This cloud has often been
labelled a UFO and it does
resemble a disk.
But actually, it
is a luminous cloud
composed of concentric rings.
Following the beam, we
see a dove riding upon it.
Here we see Archangel Gabriel
tearing open a hole in heaven
and anointing Mary with the
cosmic energy of the Milky Way.
It is significant that the
annunciation celebrates
Mary's transformation into the
god-bearer or Christ bearer
in this stunning,
stunning painting.
This suggests that
Mary's consciousness
has been prepared to receive
this otherworldly light
or vibration from this
otherworldly visitor.
Jan Van Ike shows the dove
hovering above Mary's head.
The blue sapphire
jewel on her forehead
symbolizes her
awakened crown chakra.
Does it symbolize the
Chintamani perhaps?
William and I were in the
Vatican Museum not so long ago
and took this
stunning photo of Mary
being anointed by the dove.
The dove appears to spray
her with a cosmic energy.
Again we notice the
concentric rings
symbolizing a
portal or a gateway.
At the Pantheon we found this
delicious annunciation image.
Once again, the dove and the
spray of otherworldly light
go together.
Mary is surrounded by rainbow
light, the rainbow body.
Here we see archangel Gabriel
conducting the holy vibration
into the consciousness of Mary.
The rod is the symbol of the
transforming alchemical power
or arcanum.
The Metropolitan
Museum in New York
houses Botticelli's
profound annunciation.
Gabriel speaks
from behind a wall
that symbolizes the veil
separating dimensions.
Mary and archangel Gabriel's
delicate and transparent crowns
suggest plasma.
Could this be the thin veil
between heaven and earth,
perhaps?
The British Library in London
houses Giovanni Pietro Birago's
heavenly annunciation.
It is mouth watering.
Her hand on the
arcanum book, one
can feel Mary's
nimbus pulsating.
In The Annunciation
by Barthel Bruyn,
a female archangel Gabriel
conducts the Holy Spirit
into the ear of Mary
with the caduceus wand,
and Mary is illuminated.
The story is told that painter
Barthel Bruyn fell asleep
after beginning the painting,
and when he awakened,
the painting was
miraculously finished.
Archangel Gabriel has clearly
taken the place of Hermes
as the conductor of souls.
She even uses the caduceus.
Going beyond the veil,
we see that Gabriel
is awakening Mary's
crown chakra.
The third eye is the
location of the pineal gland.
Known as the seat
of the soul, science
has shown that the human pineal
gland is covered with crystals.
Let's take a look at
what actually happens
in her consciousness when
Mary receives the dove.
This is a fascinating
painting of The Opening
of the Third Eye by
Mihran K Serailian.
It was commissioned
by Manly P Hall.
This painting of the head of
Minerva or Athena the Virgin
shows in part of the
activities of the pineal gland
and the pituitary
body at the time
of the opening of the third eye.
The kundalini fire
is seen rising upward
through the spinal canal
into the shape of a dove.
The pineal is shown radiating
a beautiful blue aura.
The golden light radiating
from the base of the brain
at the nape of
the neck gradually
increases in size and
intensity until it
forms the nimbus or
halo of the goddess.
All who have pierced the
veil of the grail mysteries
learn that the object
of the grail quest
is to raise our inner
fire, the illuminating
serpent of kundalini.
Up the spear or rod of the
power, the spinal column,
all the way to the brain.
Upon reaching the pea sized,
pine cone shaped mystery,
pineal gland, at the
center of the brain,
kundalini's fire fuses
the pineal's brain sand
and makes or manufactures
the stone of the wise.
This stone emits or
secretes an elixir.
The secretion of the ages
that anoints and purifies
the body, transforming
it into a superhuman.
The dove plays a key role
in the baptism of Jesus.
Before he was
baptized, Mark refers
to Jesus as from Nazareth of
Galilee in Mark 1 verses 9.
Whereas afterwards he is
referred to the Nazarene,
Mark 1 verse 24,
suggesting a transformation
at the time of baptism.
We see the dove once
again descending
in concentric rainbow rings
symbolic of a vibration,
perhaps.
The divine essence drips from
the rainbow, and the dove
into the open crown
chakra of Jesus.
An angel stands close
by waiting to give Jesus
his cloak, symbolic
of the light body.
Mark describes the baptism
in Mark 1 verses 9 to 10:
"And it came to
pass in those days
that Jesus came from
Nazareth of Galilee
and was baptized
of John in Jordan.
And straightaway, coming
up out of the water,
he saw the heavens torn open
and the spirit, like a dove,
descending upon him."
In Fra Angelico's
painting of the baptism,
the dove emerges from an
opening in the heavens.
In the baptism by Leonardo
da Vinci and Andrea del
Verrocchio, we
see a radiant dove
spraying Jesus
with divine light.
He wears a
multi-colored garment,
suggestive of the rainbow body.
>>WILLIAM: So gosh, Clare,
that was incredible.
We start out with
these paintings,
we see a stone and then
the rod and then we
put the two together and we
realize, hey, wait a minute,
the rod is within us
and so is the stone.
In your Beyond the
Veil segment, I
could just feel when
that dove is hovering,
I can feel that spray
of light, and that's
exactly what these artists
intended, isn't it?
>>CLARE: It certainly is.
It certainly is.
But you know, William,
what I find amazing
is that across from
the beginning of time
when all these incredible
masters did their paintings
and they hid beautiful
symbolism in their paintings,
who would ever know?
And they lived, whereas
anybody uttering
one word from their
mouths, they were
burned at the stake as heretics.
And yet the painters
got away with murder.
And thank goodness they
did or we would not
be able to learn
and see and embrace
all the fantastic things that
are out there in the paintings
that we've shown today.
And there's more to come.
>>WILLIAM: There's much
more to come on Arcanum.
Thank you all for
watching this episode.
I'll see you next
time on Gaiam TV.
>>CLARE: Bye bye.